Mohamed/1.58 llm new era of extreme quantization (#2339)
huggingface/blog: 1.58llm_extreme_quantization.md

## Introduction

As Large Language Models (LLMs) grow in size and complexity, finding ways to reduce their computational and energy costs has become a critical challenge. One popular solution is quantization, where model precision is reduced from the standard 16-bit floating-point (FP16) or 32-bit floating-point (FP32) to lower-bit formats like 8-bit or 4-bit. While this approach significantly cuts down on memory usage and speeds up computation, it often comes at the expense of accuracy. Reducing the precision too much can cause models to lose crucial information, resulting in degraded performance. 

In this blog, we'll dive into the process of 1.58 bit quantization. First, we'll review the key research paper that explains the theory behind this quantization method. Next, we'll address the challenges of fine-tuning quantized bitnet models and how we managed to train the best-performing 7/8B BitNet on downstream tasks. Finally, we'll discuss optimizing performance for fast inference, including writing specialized kernels to speed up processing. This comprehensive look will help you understand how to get the best out of LLMs while reducing their computational costs.

> BitNet b1.58 offers a unique approach to the challenges of extreme quantization. By representing each parameter with just 1.58 bits using a ternary system (-1, 0, 1). However, a key limitation is that BitNet b1.58 goes one step further and pretrains a model in 1.58 bits. While this is cool, not everybody has budget to pretrain such models. Thus we explore in this blog post that if we add a few tricks we can simply fine-tune existing models to 1.58 bits. !! Keep reading to find out !

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BitNet b1.58 offers a unique approach to the challenges of extreme quantization. It represents each parameter with just 1.58 bits using a ternary system (-1, 0, 1). However, a key limitation is that BitNet b1.58 goes one step further and trains a model in 1.58 bits. While this is cool, not everybody has the budget to pre-train such models. Thus, in this blog post, we explore that if we add a few tricks, we can simply fine-tune existing models to 1.58 bits! Keep reading to find out!
```

## Table of contents

- [What is BitNet ?](#what-is-bitnet-)
- [Results in the paper](#results-in-the-paper)
- [Pretraining results in 1.58b](#pretraining-results-in-158b)
- [Finetuning in 1.58bit](#finetuning-in-158bit)
- [Kernels used & Benchmarks](#kernels-used--benchmarks)
- [Additional Resources](#additional-resources)
- [Integration in Transformers & how to use](#integration-in-transformers--how-to-use)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)
- [Additional Resources](#additional-resources)

> ## What is BitNet ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What is BitNet?
```

> BitNet replaces traditional Linear layers in Multi-Head Attention and Feed-Forward Networks with specialized layers called BitLinear with ternary precision. The main obstacle of training in ternary precision is that the weight values are discretized (via the `round()` function) and thus non-differentiable. BitLinear solves this with a nice trick: [STE (Straight Through Estimator)](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1903.05662). The STE allows gradients to flow through the non-differentiable rounding operation by approximating its gradient as 1 (treating `round()` as equivalent to the identity function). Another way to view it is that, instead of stopping the gradient at the rounding step, the STE lets the gradient pass through as if the rounding never occurred, enabling weight updates using standard gradient-based optimization techniques.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BitNet replaces traditional Linear layers in Multi-Head Attention and Feed-Forward Networks with specialized layers called BitLinear with ternary precision. The main obstacle to training in ternary precision is that the weight values are discretized (via the `round()` function) and thus non-differentiable. BitLinear solves this with a nice trick: [STE (Straight Through Estimator)](https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.05662). The STE allows gradients to flow through the non-differentiable rounding operation by approximating its gradient as 1 (treating `round()` as equivalent to the identity function). Another way to view it is that, instead of stopping the gradient at the rounding step, the STE lets the gradient pass through as if the rounding never occurred, enabling weight updates using standard gradient-based optimization techniques.
```

>  The BitLinear layers quantize the weights using ternary precision (with values of -1, 0, and 1) and quantize the activations to 8-bit precision. After performing the matrix multiplication operation, the data is dequantized, allowing the model to continue with high-precision operations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The BitLinear layers quantize the weights using ternary precision (with values of -1, 0, and 1) and quantize the activations to 8-bit precision. After performing the matrix multiplication operation, the data is dequantized, allowing the model to continue with high-precision operations. 
```

<figure style="text-align: center;">

>   <img src="assets/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/bitlinear.png" alt="Alt Text" />

Reviewer: Except for the thumbnail, all images should be in https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/tree/main/blog

  <figcaption>The architecture of BitNet with BitLinear layers</figcaption>
</figure>

> In the BitNet layer, during training, we start by making the weights ternary. We first compute the average of the weight matrix absolute value, and use this value as a scale, then divide the weights by the scale, round the values, and keep them between -1 and 1 then rescale them 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the BitNet layer, during training, we start by making the weights ternary. We first compute the average of the weight matrix absolute value and use this value as a scale, then divide the weights by the scale, round the values, keep them between -1 and 1, and then rescale them 
```

$$
scale_w = \frac{1}{\frac{1}{nm} \sum_{ij} |W_{ij}|}
$$

$$
W_q = \text{clamp}_{[-1,1]}(\text{round}(W*scale))
$$

$$
W_{dequantized} = W_q*scale_w
$$

Activations are then quantized to a specified bit-width (e.g., 8-bit) using [absmax](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2208.07339) quantization. This involves scaling the activations into a range [−Qb,Qb[. The quantization formula is:

$$
scale_x = \frac{1}{|X|_{max}}
$$

$$
X_q = \text{clamp}_{[-127,128]}(\text{round}(X*scale))
$$

$$
X_{dequantized} = X_q * scale_x
$$

> However during inference, we just quantize the weights, to ternary weights, without rescaling, and we do the same thing with activations on 8 bits, and then do a matmul with an efficient kernel before dividing by both the weight scales, and activations scales. This should to a notable improvement in inference speed especially with appropriate optimized hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, during inference, we just quantize the weights to ternary weights without rescaling. We do the same thing with activations on 8 bits, and then we do a matmul with an efficient kernel before dividing by both the weight scales and activations scales. This should result in a notable improvement in inference speed, especially with appropriate optimized hardware.
```

To maintain the variance of the output after quantization, we apply Layer Normalization (LN) before quantizing the activations. This normalization ensures that the variance remains around 1:

$$
\text{LN}(x) = \frac{x - E(x)}{\sqrt{\text{Var}(x) + \epsilon}}
$$

where ϵ is a small number to prevent overflow.

> After the introduction of the round function which is non differentiable during the training phase, the backward pass computation needs the introduction of a [STE](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1903.05662) as mentioned before using the trick in the code below : 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the introduction of the round function, which is nondifferentiable during the training phase, the backward pass computation needs the introduction of a [STE](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1903.05662) as mentioned before using the trick in the code below : 
```

> ```python

Reviewer: Add imports of things being used too please

```
import torch
import torch.nn as nn
import torch.nn.functional as F
```

Author: Done

# Adapted from https://github.com/microsoft/unilm/blob/master/bitnet/The-Era-of-1-bit-LLMs__Training_Tips_Code_FAQ.pdf
def activation_quant(x):
    scale = 127.0 / x.abs().max(dim=-1, keepdim=True).values.clamp_(min=1e-5)
    y = (x * scale).round().clamp_(-128, 127) / scale
    return y
def weight_quant(w):
    scale = 1.0 / w.abs().mean().clamp_(min=1e-5)
    u = (w * scale).round().clamp_(-1, 1) / scale
    return u
class BitLinear(nn.Linear):
    """
    Only for training, and kernel optimization is needed for efficiency.
    """
    def forward(self, x):
        w = self.weight

>         x_norm = LN(x)

Reviewer: where does `LN` come from?

Author: It's defined in the section : What is BitNet?

> def activation_quant(x):
>     scale = 127.0 / x.abs().max(dim=-1, keepdim=True).values.clamp_(min=1e-5)
>     y = (x * scale).round().clamp_(-128, 127) / scale
>     return y
> def weight_quant(w):
>     scale = 1.0 / w.abs().mean().clamp_(min=1e-5)
>     u = (w * scale).round().clamp_(-1, 1) / scale
>     return u
> class BitLinear(nn.Linear):
>     """
>     Only for training, and kernel optimization is needed for efficiency.
>     """
>     def forward(self, x):
>         w = self.weight
>         x_norm = LN(x)
>         # A trick for implementing Straight−Through−Estimator (STE) using detach()
>         x_quant = x_norm + (activation_quant(x_norm) − x_norm).detach()
>         w_quant = w + (weight_quant(w) − w).detach()
>         y = F.linear(x_quant, w_quant)
>         return y

Reviewer: ```suggestion
def activation_quant(x):
    scale = 127.0 / x.abs().max(dim=-1, keepdim=True).values.clamp_(min=1e-5)
    y = (x * scale).round().clamp_(-128, 127) / scale
    return y
 
def weight_quant(w):
    scale = 1.0 / w.abs().mean().clamp_(min=1e-5)
    u = (w * scale).round().clamp_(-1, 1) / scale
    return u

class BitLinear(nn.Linear):
    """
    Only for training; kernel optimization is needed for efficiency.
    """
    def forward(self, x):
        w = self.weight
        x_norm = LN(x)
        
        # A trick for implementing Straight−Through−Estimator (STE) using detach()
        x_quant = x_norm + (activation_quant(x_norm) - x_norm).detach()
        w_quant = w + (weight_quant(w) - w).detach()
        
        # Perform quantized linear transformation
        y = F.linear(x_quant, w_quant)
        return y
```

```

> ## Results in the paper

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Results in the Paper
```

> ### Computational efficiency :

Reviewer: (same for other headings)
```suggestion
### Computational Efficiency :
```

> For BitNet, the energy consumption during matrix multiplication is primarily influenced by the addition operations, given that the weights are ternary. The multiplication operations are limited to scaling the output with the weights scale, and activations scale, which provides enormous energy and computation savings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For BitNet, the energy consumption during matrix multiplication is primarily influenced by the addition operations, given that the weights are ternary. The multiplication operations are limited to scaling the output with the weights scale and activations scale, which provides enormous energy and computation savings.
```

### Downstream tasks

> BitNet is effective in delivering strong performance compared to baseline methods, especially at lower bit levels. According to the paper, BitNet achieves scores that are on par with 8-bit models, but with significantly lower inference costs. In the case of 4-bit models, methods that only quantize weights outperform those that quantize both weights and activations, as activations are harder to quantify. However, BitNet, which uses 1.58-bit weights, surpasses both weight-only and weight-and-activation quantization methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BitNet is effective in delivering strong performance compared to baseline methods, especially at lower bit levels. According to the paper, BitNet achieves scores that are on par with 8-bit models but with significantly lower inference costs. In the case of 4-bit models, methods that only quantize weights outperform those that quantize both weights and activations, as activations are harder to quantify. However, BitNet, which uses 1.58-bit weights, surpasses both weight-only and weight-and-activation quantization methods.
```

## Pretraining results in 1.58b

> We tried to reproduce the results of the BitNet paper, we started with a small dataset, tinystories, and a Llama3 8B model architecture. It seemed that adding a normalization function like in the paper, improves the performance, for example after 2000 steps of training, we had a perplexity on the validation part of the dataset equal to 6.3 without a normalization, and 5.9 with normalization, but in both cases, the training was stable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We tried to reproduce the results of the BitNet paper; we started with a small dataset, tinystories, and a Llama3 8B model architecture. It seemed that adding a normalization function like in the paper improves the performance. For example, after 2000 steps of training, we had a perplexity on the validation part of the dataset equal to 6.3 without normalization, and 5.9 with normalization, but in both cases, the training was stable.
```

> We tried to reproduce the results of the BitNet paper, we started with a small dataset, tinystories, and a Llama3 8B model architecture. It seemed that adding a normalization function like in the paper, improves the performance, for example after 2000 steps of training, we had a perplexity on the validation part of the dataset equal to 6.3 without a normalization, and 5.9 with normalization, but in both cases, the training was stable.

Reviewer: Please add link to tinystories if possible

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/pretraining.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 80%;"/>
  <figcaption>Pretraining plots without (blue) & with (green) layer normalisation </figcaption>
</figure>

> While this approach looks very interesting for pretraining, only few institutions can afford pretraining models at the necessary scale. However, there are already a wide range of strong pretrained models and it would be extremely useful if they could be converted to 1.58bit after pretraining. Thus we set out on an investigation to see if we can make 1.58 fine-tuning work. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this approach looks very interesting for pretraining, only a few institutions can afford pretraining models at the necessary scale. However, there is already a wide range of strong pretrained models, and it would be extremely useful if they could be converted to 1.58bit after pretraining. Thus we set out on an investigation to see if we can make 1.58 fine-tuning work. 
```

## Finetuning in 1.58bit

> When we began finetuning from Llama3 weights instead pretraining starting from random weights, the model performed slightly better, but not as good as we expected : 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we began finetuning from Llama3 weights instead of pretraining starting from random weights, the model performed slightly better but not as well as we expected: 
```

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/finetuning_basic.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 80%;"/>
  <figcaption>Finetuning plot compared to pretraining plot</figcaption>
</figure>

> To understand why, we tried to inspect both weight distributions of the randomly initialized model, and pre-trained model to identify potential issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand why, we tried to inspect both the weight distributions of the randomly initialized model and the pre-trained model to identify potential issues.
```

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: center;">
  <figure style="margin-right: 20px; text-align: center;">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/poids_aléatoires.png" alt="Image 1" style="width: 400px;" />
    <figcaption>Random weights distribution (2 merged stds)</figcaption>
  </figure>
  <figure style="text-align: center;">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/poids_llama3.png" alt="Image 2" style="width: 400px;" />
    <figcaption>Pre-trained Llama3 weights distribution</figcaption>
  </figure>
</div>

> And the scale values for the two distribution are respectively : 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And the scale values for the two distributions are, respectively : 
```

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: center;">
  <figure style="margin-right: 20px; text-align: center;">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/scales_random.png" alt="Image 1" style="width: 400px;" />
    <figcaption>Random weights scales distribution</figcaption>
  </figure>
  <figure style="text-align: center;">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/scales_llama3.png" alt="Image 2" style="width: 400px;" />
    <figcaption>Pre-trained Llama3 weights distribution</figcaption>
  </figure>
</div>

The initial random weight distribution is a mix of two normal distributions:

- One with a standard deviation (std) of 0.025
- Another with a std of 0.025 / sqrt(2 * num_hidden_layers) = 0.00325

This results from using different stds for column linear and row linear weights in nanotron. In the quantized version, all matrices have only 2 weight scales (50.25 and 402), which are the inverse of the mean absolute value of the weights for each matrix : `scale = 1.0 / w.abs().mean().clamp_(min=1e-5)`

> - For scale = 50.25, w.abs().mean() = 0.0199, leading to std = 0.025 which matches our first standard deviation. The formula used to derive the std is based on the expectation of the half-normal distribution of |w|: E(∣w∣)=std(w)⋅sqrt(2/π)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For scale = 50.25, `w.abs().mean() = 0.0199`, leading to std = 0.025 which matches our first standard deviation. The formula used to derive the std is based on the expectation of the half-normal distribution of |w|: E(∣w∣)=std(w)⋅sqrt(2/π)
```

> - For scale = 50.25, w.abs().mean() = 0.0199, leading to std = 0.025 which matches our first standard deviation. The formula used to derive the std is based on the expectation of the half-normal distribution of |w|: E(∣w∣)=std(w)⋅sqrt(2/π)

Reviewer: Consider adding some latex here

- For scale = 402, w.abs().mean() = 0.0025, leading to std = 0.00325

On the other hand, the pretrained weight's distribution looks like a normal distribution with an std ~ 0.013

> Clearly the pretrained model starts with more information (scales) while the randomly initialized model starts with practically no information and adds to it over time. Our conclusion was that starting with random weights gives the model minimal initial information, enabling a gradual learning process, while during finetuning, the introduction of BitLinear layers overwhelms the model into losing all its prior information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clearly, the pretrained model starts with more information (scales), while the randomly initialized model starts with practically no information and adds to it over time. Our conclusion was that starting with random weights gives the model minimal initial information, enabling a gradual learning process, while during finetuning, the introduction of BitLinear layers overwhelms the model into losing all its prior information.
```

> To improve the results of the finetuning, we tried different technics , like instead of using per tensor quantization, we tried per row, and per column quantization, to keep more information from the weights of Llama3. We also tried to change the way of how the scale is computed, by instead of just taking the mean absolute value of the weights, as a scale, we take the mean absolute value of the outliers as a scale (an outlier value is a value that exceeds k*mean_absolute_value where k is a constant we tried to vary in our experiments) but we didn’t notice any big improvement. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To improve the results of the finetuning, we tried different techniques, like instead of using per tensor quantization, we tried per row and per column quantization to keep more information from the weights of Llama3. We also tried to change the way how the scale is computed, by instead of just taking the mean absolute value of the weights as a scale, we take the mean absolute value of the outliers as a scale (an outlier value is a value that exceeds k*mean_absolute_value where k is a constant we tried to vary in our experiments), but we didn’t notice any big improvement. 
```

```python

> def scale_outliers(tensor, k=1):
>     mean_absolute_value = torch.mean(torch.abs(tensor))
>     outliers = tensor[torch.abs(tensor) > mean_absolute_value]
>     mean_outlier_value = torch.mean(torch.abs(outliers))
>     return mean_outlier_value
> def weight_quant_scaling(w):
>     scale = 1.0 / scale_outliers(w).clamp_(min=1e-5)
>     u = (w * scale).round().clamp_(-1, 1) / scale
>     return u
> 

Reviewer: There was an unused `k`. Is this what it should be doing?

```suggestion
def scale_outliers(tensor, threshold_factor=1):
    mean_absolute_value = torch.mean(torch.abs(tensor))
    threshold = threshold_factor * mean_absolute_value
    outliers = tensor[torch.abs(tensor) > threshold]
    mean_outlier_value = torch.mean(torch.abs(outliers))
    return mean_outlier_value

def weight_quant_scaling(w):
    scale = 1.0 / scale_outliers(w).clamp_(min=1e-5)
    quantized_weights = (w * scale).round().clamp_(-1, 1) / scale
    return quantized_weights
```

```

We observed that both the random weights and Llama3 weights resulted in losses starting at approximately the same value of 13. This suggests that the Llama3 model loses all of its prior information when quantization is introduced. To further investigate how much information the model loses during this process, we experimented with per-group quantization.

As a sanity check, we first set the group size to 1, which essentially means no quantization. In this scenario, the loss started at 1.45, as expected. However, when we increased the group size to 2, the loss jumped to around 11. This indicates that even with a minimal group size of 2, the model still loses nearly all of its information.

> To address this issue, we considered the possibility of introducing quantization gradually, rather than applying it abruptly to the weights and activations for each tensor. To achieve this, we implemented a lambda value to control the process : 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address this issue, we considered the possibility of introducing quantization gradually rather than applying it abruptly to the weights and activations for each tensor. To achieve this, we implemented a lambda value to control the process : 
```

```python
lambda_ = ?
x_quant = x + lambda_ * (activation_quant(x) - x).detach()
w_quant = w + lambda_ * (weight_quant(w) - w).detach()
```

> When `lambda` is set to 0, there is essentially no quantization occurring, while at `lambda`=1, full quantization is applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `lambda` is set to 0, there is essentially no quantization occurring, while at `lambda=1`, full quantization is applied.
```

  <figcaption>Finetuning plot with lambda = 0.25->0.5->0.75->1</figcaption>
</figure>

As a result, we decided to experiment with a `lambda` value that adjusts dynamically based on the training step.

```python
lambda_ = training_step / total_training_steps
```

Using this dynamic `lambda` value led to better loss convergence, but the perplexity (ppl) results during inference, when `lambda` was set to 1, were still far from satisfactory. We realized this was likely because the model hadn't been trained long enough with `lambda`=1. To address this, we adjusted our `lambda` value to improve the training process.

```python
lambda_ = min(2 * training_step / total_training_steps, 1)
```

With this configuration, after 2000 steps we have : 

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/lambda_training_step.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 80%;"/>
  <figcaption>Finetuning plot with lambda = min(2*training_step/total_training_steps, 1)</figcaption>
</figure>

> Our fine-tuning method shows better convergence overall. You can observe a slight increase in the loss curve around 1,000 steps, which corresponds to when we begin approaching `lambda`=1, or full quantization. However, immediately after this point, the loss starts to converge again, leading to an improved perplexity of approximately 4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our fine-tuning method shows better convergence overall. You can observe a slight increase in the loss curve around 1,000 steps, which corresponds to when we begin approaching `lambda=1`, or full quantization. However, immediately after this point, the loss starts to converge again, leading to an improved perplexity of approximately 4.
```

</figure>

The sharp increase in lambda caused instability around the 500th step and didn’t fix the first divergence issue. However, for \( k = 100 \), we observed some improvement in downstream tasks (see the results table), although perplexity remained around ~13.5. Despite this, it didn’t show a clear performance boost over a linear scheduler.

Additionally, we experimented with training models from scratch using random weights and various learning rates. This allowed us to compare the effectiveness of our fine-tuning approach against traditional pretraining methods.

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/exp-randoms.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 80%;"/>
  <figcaption>Different Pre-training plots with different learning rates</figcaption>
</figure>

None of the models trained from random weights performed better than our fine-tuned model. The best perplexity we achieved with those models was 26, which falls short compared to the results from our fine-tuning approach.

### Scaling to 100B !

> We scaled our experiments to 100 billion tokens to see if we could match the performance Llama3 8B. We conducted longer training runs, starting from our best-performing checkpoint from the shorter runs, and continued fine-tuning for 45,000 steps. We experimented with different learning rates, and while the model performed closely to the Llama3 model in some metrics, on average, it still lagged behind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We scaled our experiments to 100 billion tokens to see if we could match the performance of Llama3 8B. We conducted longer training runs, starting from our best-performing checkpoint from the shorter runs, and continued fine-tuning for 45,000 steps. We experimented with different learning rates, and while the model performed closely to the Llama3 model in some metrics, on average, it still lagged behind.
```

Here are some examples of the metrics we evaluated at various checkpoints during the training :
<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/metrics_100B.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 80%;"/>
  <figcaption>Metrics evaluations during the training for different lrs</figcaption>
</figure>

and the average score looks like : 

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/metric_avg.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 60%;"/>
  <figcaption>Average evaluation during the training for different lrs</figcaption>
</figure>

### Experiments on Smaller Models

In our initial experiments with smaller models like Smol LLMs, we observed that the warmup quantization technique didn’t yield as much improvement as it did with larger models. This suggests that the effectiveness of warmup quantization could be more closely related to model size and complexity.

> For example, here are the loss curves for the Smol LLM 135M model, comparing warmup quantization with full quantization from the start. Interestingly, the curves closely align, and the resulting perplexities aren't significantly different.

Reviewer: I suggest adding more links to models and datasets

For the 100B tokens experiments, the best performing checkpoint we had is the following : 

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/metrics_100B_table.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 60%;"/>
  <figcaption>Metrics comparison with Llama models for the model trained on 100B tokens</figcaption>
</figure>

For the 70B model

## Kernels used & Benchmarks

To benefit from the BitNet low-precision weights, we pack them into an `int8` tensor. During inference, these weights must be unpacked before performing matrix multiplication. We implemented custom kernels in Cuda and Triton to handle the on-the-fly unpacking during the matrix multiplication process. For the matrix multiplication itself, we employed the cached tiled matrix multiplication technique. To fully grasp this approach, let's first review some Cuda programming fundamentals.

> ### **Basic GPU Concepts: Threads, Blocks, and Shared Memory**

Reviewer: Very cool section :fire:

- **Memory Bandwidth**: Accessing global memory is relatively slow compared to the speed at which the GPU cores can perform computations. If each thread reads matrix elements directly from global memory, the memory access times can become a bottleneck.
- **Redundant Data Access**: In matrix multiplication, many elements of the input matrices are used multiple times. If each thread fetches the required data from global memory independently, the same data might be loaded into the GPU multiple times, leading to inefficiency. For example, if each thread is used to compute a single element in the output matrix, the thread responsible for calculating the element at position (i, j) will need to load the i-th row of matrix A and the j-th column of matrix B from global memory. However, other threads, such as the one computing the element at position (i+1, j), cannot reuse this data and will have to reload the same j-th column from global memory again.

### **The Idea of Tiling**

> Tiling is a technique used to address these challenges and it was mainly used in FlashAttention to improve the kernels efficiency. The basic idea is to divide the matrices into smaller sub-matrices, called tiles, which can fit into the shared memory of the GPU. Instead of computing the entire output matrix in one go, the computation is broken down into smaller pieces that are processed tile by tile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tiling is a technique used to address these challenges, and it was mainly used in FlashAttention to improve the kernel's efficiency. The basic idea is to divide the matrices into smaller sub-matrices, called tiles, which can fit into the shared memory of the GPU. Instead of computing the entire output matrix in one go, the computation is broken down into smaller pieces that are processed tile by tile.
```

## Integration in Transformers & how to use

To integrate the BitNet architecture into Transformers, we introduced a new quantization method called "bitnet." This method involves replacing the standard Linear layers with specialized BitLinear layers that are compatible with the BitNet architecture, with appropriate activation dynamic quantization, weight unpacking, and matrix multiplication. 

Loading and testing the model in Transformers is incredibly straightforward! Here's how you can do it:

```python
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("", device_map="cuda", torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16)    
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct")

input_text = ""
input_ids = tokenizer.encode(input_text, return_tensors="pt").cuda()
output = model_.generate(input_ids, max_length=100, do_sample=False)
generated_text = tokenizer.decode(output[0], skip_special_tokens=True)
print(generated_text)
```

With this code, everything is managed seamlessly behind the scenes, so there's no need to worry about additional complexities. 

## Conclusion

> In conclusion, as (LLMs) continue to expand, reducing their computational demands through quantization is essential. This blog has explored the approach of 1.58-bit quantization, which uses a ternary weights. While pretraining models in 1.58 bits is resource-intensive, we’ve demonstrated that, with some tricks, it’s possible to fine-tune existing models to this precision level, achieving efficient performance without sacrificing accuracy. By optimizing inference speed and utilizing specialized kernels, BitNet b1.58 opens new possibilities for making LLMs more practical and scalable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In conclusion, as (LLMs) continue to expand, reducing their computational demands through quantization is essential. This blog has explored the approach of 1.58-bit quantization, which uses ternary weights. While pretraining models in 1.58 bits are resource-intensive, we’ve demonstrated that, with some tricks, it’s possible to fine-tune existing models to this precision level, achieving efficient performance without sacrificing accuracy. By optimizing inference speed and utilizing specialized kernels, BitNet b1.58 opens new possibilities for making LLMs more practical and scalable.
```

BitNet offers a unique approach to the challenges of extreme quantization. It represents each parameter with just 1.58 bits using a ternary system (-1, 0, 1). However, a key limitation is that BitNet goes one step further and trains a model in 1.58 bits. While this is cool, not everybody has the budget to pre-train such models. Thus, in this blog post, we explore that if we add a few tricks, we can simply fine-tune existing models to 1.58 bits! Keep reading to find out!

## Table of Contents

- [What is BitNet ?](#what-is-bitnet-)
- [Results in the paper](#results-in-the-paper)
- [Pretraining results in 1.58b](#pretraining-results-in-158b)
- [Finetuning in 1.58bit](#finetuning-in-158bit)
- [Kernels used & Benchmarks](#kernels-used--benchmarks)
- [Additional Resources](#additional-resources)
- [Integration in Transformers & how to use](#integration-in-transformers--how-to-use)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)
- [Additional Resources](#additional-resources)

## What is BitNet?

> BitNet replaces traditional Linear layers in Multi-Head Attention and Feed-Forward Networks with specialized layers called BitLinear with ternary precision. The main obstacle to training in ternary precision is that the weight values are discretized (via the `round()` function) and thus non-differentiable. BitLinear solves this with a nice trick: [STE (Straight Through Estimator)](https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.05662). The STE allows gradients to flow through the non-differentiable rounding operation by approximating its gradient as 1 (treating `round()` as equivalent to the identity function). Another way to view it is that, instead of stopping the gradient at the rounding step, the STE lets the gradient pass through as if the rounding never occurred, enabling weight updates using standard gradient-based optimization techniques.

Reviewer 2: I think it's better to talk about how STE overcomes the gradient issue after explaining how this layer do.

> The BitLinear layers quantize the weights using ternary precision (with values of -1, 0, and 1) and quantize the activations to 8-bit precision. After performing the matrix multiplication operation during inference, the data is dequantized, allowing the model to continue with high-precision operations. 

Reviewer 2: Can you give more information about the qunatization (per-token, per-channel, sym/asym) ? It will help users to google search that if they don't totally understand !

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/bitlinear.png" alt="Alt Text" />
  <figcaption>The architecture of BitNet with BitLinear layers</figcaption>
</figure>

> In the BitNet layer, during training, we start by making the weights ternary. We first compute the average of the weight matrix absolute value and use this value as a scale, then divide the weights by the scale, round the values, keep them between -1 and 1, and then rescale them 

Reviewer 2: I think it can be nice to add an real example of how you quantize let's say a 3x3 matrix.
```suggestion
In the BitNet layer, during training, we start by quantizing the weights. We first compute the average of the weight matrix absolute value and use this value as a scale, then divide the weights by the scale, round the values, keep them between -1 and 1, and then rescale them 
```

> In the BitNet layer, during training, we start by making the weights ternary. We first compute the average of the weight matrix absolute value and use this value as a scale, then divide the weights by the scale, round the values, keep them between -1 and 1, and then rescale them 

Reviewer 2: To dissociate the training and inference part clearly, I think it can be nice to create subsection as the behavior changes a bit. The Bitlinear code is not the same depending on if we do training or inference.
